progressive muscle

relaxation

One of the body’s reactions to fear and anxiety is muscle tension. This can result in feeling “tense”, or
can lead to muscle aches and pains, as well as leaving some people feeling exhausted. Think about how
you respond to anxiety. Do you “tense up” when you’re feeling anxious? Muscle relaxation can be
particularly helpful in cases where anxiety is especially associated to muscle tension. This information
sheet will guide you through a common form of relaxation designed to reduce muscle tension.

Muscle tension

Relaxation sequence

Muscle tension is commonly associated with stress,
anxiety and fear as part of a process that helps our
bodies prepare for potentially dangerous situations. Even
though some of those situations may not actually be
dangerous, our bodies respond in the same way.
Sometimes we don’t even notice how our muscles
become tense, but perhaps you clench your teeth
slightly so your jaw feels tight, or maybe your shoulders
become. Muscle tension can also be associated with
backaches and tension headaches.

Progressive Muscle Relaxation
One method of reducing muscle tension that people
have found helpful is through a technique called
Progressive Muscle Relaxation (PMR). In progressive
muscle relaxation exercises, you tense up particular
muscles and then relax them, and then you practise this
technique consistently.

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

9.

preparing for relaxation

10.

When you are beginning to practice progressive muscle
relaxation exercises keep in mind the folloing points.

11.

• Physical injuries. If you have any injuries, or a
history of physical problems that may cause muscle
pain, always consult your doctor before you start.
• Select your surroundings. Minimise the distraction
to your five senses. Such as turning off the TV and
radio, and using soft lighting.
• Make yourself comfortable. Use a chair that
comfortably seats your body, including your head.
Wear loose clothing, and take off your shoes.
• Internal mechanics. Avoid practicing after big,
heavy meals, and do not practice after consuming any
intoxicants, such as alcohol.

12.
13.
14.

15.
16.
17.
18.

Right hand and forearm. Make a fist with your right
hand.
Right upper arm. Bring your right forearm up to
your shoulder to “make a muscle”.
Left hand and forearm.
Left upper arm.
Forehead. Raise your eyebrows as high as they will go,
as though you were surprised by something.
Eyes and cheeks. Squeeze your eyes tight shut.
Mouth and jaw. Open your mouth as wide as you can,
as you might when you‘re yawning.
Neck. !!! Be careful as you tense these muscles. Face
forward and then pull your head back slowly, as though
you are looking up to the ceiling.
Shoulders. Tense the muscles in your shoulders as you
bring your shoulders up towards your ears.
Shoulder blades/Back. Push your shoulder blades
back, trying to almost touch them together, so that your
chest is pushed forward.
Chest and stomach. Breathe in deeply, filling up your
lungs and chest with air.
Hips and buttocks. Squeeze your buttock muscles
Right upper leg. Tighten your right thigh.
Right lower leg. !!! Do this slowly and carefully to
avoid cramps. Pull your toes towards you to stretch the
calf muscle.
Right foot. Curl your toes downwards.
Left upper leg. Repeat as for right upper leg.
Left lower leg. Repeat as for right lower leg.
Left foot. Repeat as for right foot.

general procedure
1 Once you’ve set aside the time and place for
relaxation, slow down your breathing and give
yourself permission to relax.
2 When you are ready to begin, tense the muscle group
described. Make sure you can feel the tension, but not
so much that you feel a great deal of pain. Keep the
muscle tensed for approximately 5 seconds.
3 Relax the muscles and keep it relaxed for
approximately 10 seconds. It may be helpful to say
something like “Relax” as you relax the muscle.
4 When you have finished the relaxation procedure,
remain seated for a few moments allowing yourself to
become alert.

Practice means progress. Only through practice can you
become more aware of your muscles, how they respond
with tension, and how you can relax them. Training your
body to respond differently to stress is like any training –
practising consistently is the key.

for
Centrelinical
C Interventions

• Psychotherapy • Research • Training

This document is for information purposes only. Please refer to the full disclaimer and copyright statement available at
http://www.cci.health.wa.gov.au regarding the information from this website before making use of such information.

See website www.cci.health.wa.gov.au for more handouts and resources.

