So here's the amazing thing about your brain. It's made to rewire itself all the time. This is called neuroplasticity. Scientists used to think that after childhood, our brain was pretty much locked in place. But now that we have better imaging technology, we can literally see how the brain changes depending on how we use it.

So in this video, I'm going to talk about one very simple thing you can do to rewire your brain to be less anxious. And it is simple, but it's not easy. So I'm also going to share three steps you can take to make it happen and share ten extra skills that you can develop on your own or with a therapist to build up your ability to take control of your anxiety. And if you'd like to learn more in depth information about how to treat your anxiety, I've got a course on Udemy that I'm working on. It's called rewiring the anxious brain.

So you can also check out that link in the description.

So let's start off with one example of neuroplasticity. In London, the taxi drivers have this super difficult exam where they have to prepare by memorizing all the streets and events and locations in this huge city. Researchers took images of their brain before they started studying and after this two year process, and they were literally able to see the new neural connections, the wiring that changed in the brain. And there's good evidence that changing how you think, like going to therapy, can actually change the structure of your brain and the types of chemicals that it's pumping out. Our brain has an amazing ability to rewire itself, to learn, grow and heal.

So let's talk about how to do that with anxiety. If we want to change how our brain processes anxiety, we need to understand three principles of anxiety. Number one, understand what is anxiety? Now, this may sound dumb because you already know what anxiety feels like, but what you need to do is understand your perspective on anxiety. You need to let go of the idea that anxiety is bad.

Anxiety is not inherently bad. Anxiety is uncomfortable. Sometimes anxiety is disordered. Sometimes anxiety gets in the way. But we all experience anxiety because it's supposed to serve a really important function to motivate us to avoid real danger.

We're supposed to feel anxious when standing on a cliff edge. It helps us be safe. We're supposed to feel anxious when we know we have an important test coming up, because that should motivate us to study. Anxiety tells us that something is important to us. Anxiety and excitement are basically the same chemical reaction in your body with adrenaline, triggering that sympathetic activation and prepping you for action.

When we look at anxiety as being uncomfortable but acceptable and a normal part of life, suddenly we develop new tools to work with it, and that includes working with the other type of anxiety. So the second thing we need to understand is we need to understand disordered anxiety. And this is when anxiety seems to take over your life. This is anxiety that makes it hard to go to work, to school, or to enjoy life at all. And the harder you try to make it go away, the stronger and stronger it gets.

Now, contrary to popular belief that anxiety is disordered when it's more severe, anxiety is actually disordered when one of two things happened, when number one, when you feel in danger, when you're actually safe. And I made a video on this. It's called perceived versus Actual safety. For example, I worked with a client who was afraid of radiators. She would feel anxious and sweaty around them, and she couldn't make herself go into a room with a radiator in it.

Now, radiators are not actually dangerous, but she was having a real physiological response to something that was actually safe. So anxiety can be disordered when you have a danger response in your body, but you're actually safe. The second way anxiety can be disordered is when your anxiety interferes with your ability to function. This is essentially what determines if you meet the criteria for an anxiety disorder diagnosis when your anxiety or your attempts to avoid anxiety stop you from effectively facing life. When this happens, you start avoiding school or calling in sick to work.

You stop leaving the house or spending time with friends. Pretty soon, your anxiety is taking over your life and stopping you from doing the things you love. So let's talk about what causes anxiety to spiral out of control. This is called the anxiety cycle. Every day throughout our day, we have experiences, and we interpret these experiences as either being safe or dangerous.

So let's say, for example, you see a dog. Now, each person interprets an experience differently. For some people, this would be exciting and fun, but for some reason, you think, that dog is going to bite me. This leads to feelings of fear, anxiety, maybe even panic. These are uncomfortable feelings, and you may even take them as a sign that your thoughts are true.

So you escape, you run away, you get out of there, and nothing bad happens. So your brain releases this surge of relief. Whew. That was close. The only way I survived was because I ran away.

I could have died. And your brain thinks, I better do that again. I'm going to motivate my human to avoid that situation by increasing their anxiety about it. And voila, your anxiety goes up. Every single time that we avoid a threat and survive, our brain thinks, let's do that again.

So it lays down neural pathways, this wiring that reinforces that behavior. And the whole function of emotions is to motivate us to action. But that's a whole another video. So our brain, because we've convinced it that the dog was a threat, it takes action into its own hands, and it increases your anxiety level around dogs. Every time we feel anxiety and then avoid the situation, our anxiety level will go up a notch.

So this is principle number three. Avoidance feeds disordered anxiety. It literally creates overwhelming anxiety. Now, there are lots of ways to avoid. There's running away and physically avoiding, but there's also emotional avoidance.

So if you have social anxiety, you might still go to the party, but only if you get drunk ahead of time. Or you might be in a relationship but scared of getting hurt. So you don't allow yourself to let the other person into your heart. You stay emotionally distant or you protect yourself by not committing social media. Anger, blame, distraction, and even coping skills can be avoidant.

Regardless of the type of avoidance. It increases your anxiety, and even worse, it shrinks down your world. So with the dog example, you might start avoiding situations where a dog might be present by not going to friends homes or skipping the park. And your world shrinks. You miss out on good relationships, or you stop going to parties and your world gets more and more constrained.

Avoidance can make your world small and scary and unhappy. But every time you get anxious and avoid something and survive, your brain increases your anxiety in that area. Now, looking at this cycle, we have two places where we can intervene, where we can stop that anxiety from spiraling out of control. The first place is with our actions when we feel anxiety. But we're actually safe if we stick with it.

If we stay there, we experience our emotions and sensations without running away. And again, if you do this and you don't die, then your brain learns, phew, what a relief. I guess that not all dogs are dangerous. Let's do that again. And it sends out a surge of relief.

This leads to a gradual decrease in anxiety over time and a gradual increase in your emotional muscles, your ability to feel emotions and sensations that are uncomfortable without needing to escape them all the time. So you get better at feeling as you do this. Your brain literally lays down new neural pathways, saying, not all dogs are dangerous, I don't need to be anxious around dogs. And it literally changes your brain chemistry, releasing less cortisol and adrenaline and other stress hormones. This is the most straightforward way to rewire your brain to have less anxiety.

But I get it, this is super hard. If it were easy, you would have already done it. So I'm going to break it down into three big steps for you. Now, on a side note, the second place in this cycle to intervene is with your thoughts changing how you think about the dog. And this can be a powerful and effective treatment, too.

But it can also get really complicated. And it works best before you're anxious rather than during. Now, I talk about some of the ways you can change your thinking in other videos. But in this video we're going to talk about the most straightforward way to rewire the anxious brain, and that's through action. So how to do it?

There are three steps. So step one, make an exposure hierarchy. I've made an entire video about this, but basically you take one thing that scares you and you break it down into teeny tiny steps. And you start by courageously facing the easiest one first. Now, this is the part that most people miss.

They jump in too fast and then they panic or they escape and they never do it again. And then that fear is reinforced. So make an exposure hierarchy and write down as many teeny little steps as you can think of. Step two change your rules. Now, courage doesn't mean the absence of fear, but choosing that something is more important than avoiding fear.

In acceptance and commitment therapy, this is called willingness. Allowing yourself to do something even though it makes you uncomfortable. If you make a rule for yourself like, I'm going to do this until I get too anxious, then your brain will be like, cool, let's do that. Then I can escape. So it will make you really anxious.

And when we say, I'm going to do this thing unless it makes me too anxious, then we're just inviting anxiety to make all our decisions for us. So when it comes to exposure, you choose an easier activity to start with, and then you stay with it and you watch yourself for a certain amount of time, or until your anxiety decreases by half during the exposure. Now, while you're facing your anxiety and practicing willingness, grounding activities and self regulation activities, this body up approach to decreasing anxiety can be helpful. But the most important part is that you sit with your anxiety for a little while until it decreases, or at least for a certain set amount of time. Now, step three do it, face it, go get anxious and see if you survive.

A little spoiler alert here. You will so with the dog example. Start by repeatedly imagining yourself interacting with a dog. And you practice this every day for ten minutes until that activity no longer makes you very anxious. And then you might work with a friend who has a dog to set up the next steps.

So you might see a dog through a window and you just stay there and you sit with it and you breathe and you allow yourself to relax. And you do this every day for ten minutes until your anxiety decreases. And then you practice being in the same room as a tiny dog on a leash, and then perhaps touching a tiny dog on a leash and then petting a tiny dog on a leash. And eventually you're moving up to a bigger dog and then off a leash. Then eventually you get yourself to the point where you can go to a dog park, sit down and stay there for 30 minutes.

It's okay if you feel anxious. It's okay if you feel uncomfortable or you sweat or you shake or whatever. But you just stick with it, and pretty soon your brain learns it's cool. Most dogs are safe, you're okay, and your anxiety will decrease. Now, again, you can do some physiological grounding activities while in the midst of your anxiety.

But don't use those as another way to just avoid anxiety. Use those as a way to practice willingness. This willingness to feel what you're feeling and accept it as being normal, natural, and okay. So there's the simple solution to anxiety. Face your fears and they will decrease.

This may seem too simple or too impossible, too big of a leap. So therapists have devised a bunch of ways to break that leap down into a bunch of tiny steps, a bunch of skills that you can learn to make it easier. If you want to go more in depth into that, let's do that. Let's talk about the more detailed process of how we do this, the specific skills that help us move from anxiety avoidance to power over our anxiety. Because I'm trying to cram so much information into this topic, I've decided to split this video up into two parts.

So check out part two for the ten skills you can develop to help you face your fears. Gradual Exposure Therapy, which is what I just described, is a research backed approach shown to help reduce anxiety and treat anxiety disorders. It does this because it literally changes the brain, rewiring the neural pathways and changing the release of chemicals in the brain. So make sure to check out my part two with those ten skills to help you face your fears. And if you'd like to learn more in depth information about how to treat your anxiety, I've got a course on Udemy that I'm working on.

It's called rewiring the anxious brain. So you can also check out that link in the description. Now, please share this video. You never know who might benefit from it. Thanks for watching and take care.

