what can be done about

social anxiety?

If you have been affected by social anxiety, you might naturally be wondering what you can do about it.
There are a number of different options that you may wish to consider. If you are looking for ways that
you can start reducing your anxiety in social situations, be sure to talk to your doctor or a mental
health practitioner for more information about these and other options available to you.

Medication
Medication has been used to reduce anxiety
symptoms in social situations. While there are a
number of different medications that may help to
reduce anxiety symptoms, it is often difficult to
know which one will work the best. You should
always speak to your doctor if you have any
queries about medication, and if your doctor
prescribes them, make sure you follow all the
instructions, and report any side effects.

Cognitive-Behavioural Strategies
Another option for reducing social anxiety is to
use cognitive-behavioural strategies. These
strategies involve addressing the three
components that specifically contribute to anxiety
in social situations. These components include
thoughts, physical reactions and avoidance. In this
way, cognitive-behavioural strategies seek to
change the anxiety habits that may have developed
in response to social situations.
Physical Reactions
You may have felt a number of
physical reactions in response to
anxious social situations such as
rapid breathing, pounding heart,
sweating, clammy palms, and muscle

tension. To help the body restore itself to a calmer
state and reduce the physical symptoms of anxiety you
can use some relaxation techniques. Some people use
yoga or meditation to help them relax. You can also
use some simple calming techniques by slowing your
breathing down. You’d be surprised how much
changing our breathing can change how our bodies
respond to anxiety!
Thoughts
If you feel very anxious when it
comes to social situations, you may
find that your thinking influences
how anxious you feel. For example, being concerned
that people will think poorly of you, focussing on
negative feedback, or worrying about future and past
events, can all increase your anxiety levels.
By looking at these thoughts, or cognitions, and
determining how you change unhelpful thoughts into
more helpful thoughts, you can start to reduce the
anxiety that you feel in social situations.
Behaviour
One of the most important factors that needs to be addressed in social anxiety is the avoidance of social
situations. The more you don’t go into these situations,
the more you’ll believe that you can’t go into them.
That doesn’t necessarily mean that you should take on
your biggest fear straight away. There are ways to
gently confront those situations one step at a time.

C
CI

entre for
linical
nterventions

• Psychotherapy • Research • Training

This document is for information purposes only. Please refer to the full disclaimer and copyright statement available at
http://www.cci.health.wa.gov.au regarding the information from this website before making use of such information.

See website www.cci.health.wa.gov.au for more handouts and resources.

