Breathing
Retraining
Everyone knows that breathing is an essential part of life, but did you know that breathing plays an
essential role in anxiety? This information sheet will briefly discuss the role of breathing in anxiety
and guide you through a simple breathing retraining technique that uses breathing patterns to help
deal with anxiety.
Breathing is a powerful determinant of physical
state. When our breathing rate becomes elevated,
a number of physiological changes begin to occur.
Perhaps you’ve noticed this yourself when you‘ve
had a fright; you might suddenly gasp, feel a little
breathless and a little light-headed, as well as feeling
some tingling sensations around your body. Believe
it or not, the way we breathe is a major factor in
producing these and other sensations that are
noticeable when we are anxious.

Gaining control over your breathing involves both
slowing your rate of breathing and changing your
breathing style. Use the following steps to be well
on your way to developing a better breathing habit.
1
2
3
4

Anxious breathing
You probably already know that we breathe in to
obtain oxygen and we breathe out to expel carbon
dioxide. The body naturally maintains optimal levels
of oxygen and carbon dioxide, and this balance is in
part maintained through how fast and how deeply
we breathe. When we exercise, for example, we
breathe faster and more deeply in order to replace
the oxygen being used and expel the extra carbon
dioxide produced by metabolic changes.
Anxiety causes an increase in our breathing rate, as
part of the physical fight or flight response to a
perceived threat. However, when our breathing
rate increases without any physical exertion, we
breathe out too much carbon dioxide. If the body
cannot quickly return carbon dioxide levels to the
optimal range, we experience further symptoms
such as dizziness, light-headedness, headache,
weakness and tingling in the extremities and muscle
stiffness.
The normal rate of breathing is 10-14 breaths per
minute – what’s your breathing rate?

Breathing Retraining
While temporary overbreathing and
hyperventilation are not specifically dangerous (it’s
even used in medical testing!), continued
overbreathing can leave you feeling exhausted or
“on edge” so that you’re more likely to respond to
stressful situations with intense anxiety and panic.

5

Ensure that you are sitting on a comfortable
chair or laying on a bed
Take a breath in for 4 seconds (through the
nose if possible
Hold the breath for 2 seconds
Release the breath taking 6 seconds (through
the nose if possible)., then pause slightly
before breathing in again.
Practise, practise, practise!

Breathing tips


When you first begin changing your breathing, it
may be difficult to slow your breathing down to
this rate. You may wish to try using a 3-in, 1hold, 4-out breathing rate to start off with.



When you are doing your breathing exercises,
make sure that you are using a stomach
breathing style rather than a chest breathing
style. You can check this by placing one hand on
your stomach and one hand on your chest. The
hand on your stomach should rise when you
breathe in.



Try to practise at least once or twice a day at a
time when you can relax, relatively free from
distraction. This will help to develop a more
relaxed breathing habit. The key to progress
really is practise, so try to set aside some time
each day.

By using breathing retraining you can slow your
breathing down and reduce your general level
anxiety. With enough practice, it can even help
to better cope with anxiety when you are in an
anxious situation.

C
CI

entre for
linical
nterventions

•Psychotherapy•Research•Training

This document is for information purposes only. Please refer to the full disclaimer and copyright statement available at
http://www.cci.health.wa.gov.au regarding the information from this website before making use of such information.

See website www.cci.health.wa.gov.au for more handouts and resources.

