what is
social anxiety?
Almost everyone gets a little anxious or embarrassed in front of other people now and then, though
some of us are more shy than others. Sometimes, though, the anxiety can be so intense that it stops us
from doing the things we enjoy, or starts interfering in our daily lives. If this sounds familiar to you, this
information sheet can help to give you a better idea of what social anxiety is.

Social anxiety is used to describe feelings of
anxiety and fear that occur in response to social
situations. Even the most confident of people can get a
little anxious before a presentation, or when they’re
meeting new people, but in social anxiety this distress
can be so overwhelming that it feel’s as though it‘s
difficult to cope. Often, that overwhelming anxiety is
experienced when just thinking about the situation or
remembering a previous event. You may also have
heard the term “social phobia” used to describe these
feelings.
Perhaps you feel highly anxious and distressed only in
some specific situations, such as presenting to a group
of people, or perhaps you feel this anxiety across most
situations that generally involve other people. Do you
feel extremely anxious in any of the following
situations?
Being the center of attention
Meeting new people
Talking to people in authority
Presentations or talking in front of people
Parties and social gatherings
Being watched while doing something, such as
signing your name, eating, or drinking
These situations commonly cause distress for people
with social anxiety, though there are certainly others.
Whatever situation you might feel anxious in, there are
a number of symptoms that you may feel in response
to social situations.

Thoughts
Do you worry a lot about what other people think, or
worry that you will do something embarrassing in front
of others? Perhaps you really want other people to like
you, or you want to do the right thing by others, and
become really worried that you’ll “mess it up”. You
might focus on other people’s reactions, wondering
how you look or what they are thinking about you.
People with social anxiety are often very concerned
that other people will think negatively of them and are
especially worried about situations where they may be
evaluated, criticised or embarrassed.

Physical
When you are in particular social situations, or
thinking about social situations, you may experience a
number of physical reactions. Perhaps you are sitting at
work one day and your boss asks you to sit in on a
meeting with some new clients. Your anxiety increases
and all of a sudden, you become flustered; you start to
feel warm, your breathing becomes irregular, your
heart beats faster, you feel a little lightheaded and you
have to close your eyes to try and settle yourself
down. You may recognise some of these symptoms in
relation to your own response to social situations.
Heart palpitations, or racing and pounding heart
Sweating
Trembling or shaking
Shortness of breath or a choking feeling
Chest pain or a tightness in your chest
Nausea
Lightheadedness, dizziness, or feeling faint
Chills or hot flushes
Numbness or tingling sensations
Blushing
Dry throat and mouth

Avoidance
You may have been in a few social
situations where you’ve wanted to hide
away from everyone. As a result, you
may have avoided these types of
situations for some time – trying to
escape from as many as you can, and feeling intense
distress during the situations you can’t avoid.
If you can relate to these symptoms, then social
anxiety might be a problem in your life. Talk to
your doctor or mental health professional about
the kinds of symptoms that you get in social
situations, and let them talk to you about what you
can do to ease your anxiety.

This document is for information purposes only. Please refer to the full disclaimer and copyright statement available at
http://www.cci.health.wa.gov.au regarding the information from this website before making use of such information.

See website www.cci.health.wa.gov.au for more handouts and resources.

for
Centrelinical
C Interventions

• Psychotherapy • Research • Training

